(upbeat music)
Welcome to part one of the course,
where we will talk about how to save way more money today
and in the long run.
In my hand I'm holding a football.
Lemme see if you can get a better look at that.
Sorry about the glare.
See if you can read that, okay?
Now, why am I holding this football?
Well, I wanna start the saving part of this course
by talking about some of the best athletes in the world,
okay?
And this might shock you.
And what do football players have in common?
Well, the average national football league
or NFL player, makes $5.5 billion dollars per year,
and shockingly,
78% of all NFL football players
are about to or actually declare bankruptcy
within a few years of retiring
from playing professional football.
Isn't that unbelievable?
And a lot of people that win the lottery,
couple years later, they spend all of it, and much more.
And it's because they obviously didn't have
the best savings best practices,
which we'll discuss in this section of the course.
And I wanna humbly make sure that this type of
bankruptcy phenomemon never happens to you.
Now,
why are most players broke after they retire?
Because they didn't live below their means,
which I have written up here,
"Please live below your means".
And they obviously didn't save enough,
and they likely didn't understand
the concept of compound interest,
and the unbelievable future value of savings,
which is the first exercise
that we're gonna do together in this course.
And I'm not picking on the Dallas Cowboys,
I just think they have a pretty cool logo, okay?
So,
very small changes in your spending patterns
can lead to enormous fortunes later in life.
I'm gonna put this down.
I have no idea how to throw these things.
I'm not much of an athlete.
Okay, I'm gonna put that back there.
All right.
(laughs)
So, yeah, small changes in your spending patterns
can lead to enormous fortunes later in life.
And we're gonna look at six examples of what I mean by this.
And then what we'll do is we'll do an exercise together
in the next lecture.
And the six examples are also located
in your complete personal finance dashboard file
on the third tab, right here, see?
You can also
get here by clicking this gray
money calculator button.
Okay, now I try to make it easy for you,
so there's a couple ways to get to all exercises
and options within the spreadsheet.
So please open this money calculator tab here,
as we go through this lesson,
in case you wanted to change the numbers
and assumptions as you watch this lecture.
And some of the numbers that we're gonna look at here
are gonna blow you away.
You'll be impressed.
I was, at least.
So, with all exercises and examples in the Excel file,
please
only change
the white shaded boxes.
Now, before I start to explain how you can save a fortune,
I wanna talk about the what, why, and how
of part one of the course.
So let me kick it off with the what.
By the end of part one of this course,
you'll understand what you can do
to save way, way, way, more money.
Why?
Because once we understand how you can save
a lot more money, then in part two of the course
I can show you how to protect money,
and then in part three I'll explain how to make more money,
get your money to work for you.
In terms of the how, how are we going to understand together
how we can save more money here in part one of the course?
Well, we're gonna do a number of exercises
to help you understand where your money is going
by creating your personal income statement,
and we will discuss how to save more,
and the incredible power of compound interest.
So let's jump right in.
By looking here at Example #1
on this tab in your Excel spreadsheet here,
called Exercise 1 Time Value of Money.
In Example #1 here,
let's talk about how much money we can save
in your currency
by making your own coffee or tea daily.
So, you can see that this exercise shows you the outcome
in euros because we changed the currency option
to euros in the Settings tab.
Lemme just change it to US dollars here, okay?
Just for this example.
And don't worry, as we will use many different currencies
in this course, you can always change the white shaded
cells to customize what it costs
to buy a coffee or tea or other items,
et cetera, in your country in this exercise here.
So, let's just say that a coffee or a cup of tea
costs you $2 daily.
Then if you saved that $2 daily by making your own coffee
and invested that $2 instead,
then in 40 years
you would have
$326,000,
$177
more in savings.
Now, if you and your spouse did this,
meaning $4 per day instead of two savings,
then the savings for a couple would be $652,355
over 40 years.
Change it to 45, watch what happens, right,
those last five years make it skyrocket.
Right, and play around with these numbers too,
it's a lotta fun.
And so I assume that the money you save is invested
at a return of 9.5% annually, which is actually
the average historical stock market return.
And we'll get to stock market stuff
in part three of the course.
Separately,
rates are historically very, very low today,
and they're gonna
rise a lot over the next couple of decades,
I promise you, and I digress a bit there,
as we're gonna cover interest rates in more detail later.
Now, please double click on the green cells
in order to see how I calculated the values,
if you want, or just watch the second last section
of this course for how I made this spreadsheet from scratch
in case you wanted to customize it yourself.
Now, you don't need to have any Excel or finance background
to watch how I make the spreadsheet
in the second to last section of the course,
but if you're interested, the formula I used
to calculate the value in 40 years here,
or 45 years, whatever number you set it to,
is called FV, FV stands for future value of your money.
And
in this formula, you can see the color coded inputs
for the interest rates, which I used as 9.5%,
and I divided it by 12, you see there,
as I wanted to show you the monthly calculations.
Then you have what's called nper,
which means number of periods,
which is multiplied by the number of months times 40 years,
or 45 years, however many years you're using here
in your example.
Then the payment amount which I used is $60,
meaning $2 saved
per day
times 30 days.
And you can then read the bottom line sentence here
on the right, that you will see that by saving
$60
per month
at an interest rate of 9.5% per year,
which is 9.5% divided by 12 to calculate
the monthly return, then in 40 years,
or 40 times 12 months,
you'd have
$326,177
dollars in savings, for one person.
Or for two people, meaning a couple,
you would have
$652,355
for a couple.
It's amazing, it's amazing.
And so there's a lot of assumptions here,
and I could've made this in daily percents
instead of monthly if I wanted to,
but let's just keep it simple.
We'll stick to monthly in exercise number one,
and then we'll do annual calculations in the next example.
And so the whole point of this lesson is to show you
that small changes can lead to
significant wealth generation later in life.
And didja ever notice how really wealthy people
are often cheap?
Now we know how they became wealthy.
So for now, please pause me if you want,
and play around with Example #1 of 6 here,
before moving on to Example #2,
as I don't know what the cost of coffee
or a tea is where you live in your country,
and I want you to play around with the number of years
and the interest rate as well, et cetera.
And so the bottom line here
is I just want us to
feel more comfortable with the future value
of money that we save today.
And so if you spend $4 daily,
and so does your spouse on a coffee,
which is why we call Starbucks four bucks,
sorry, bad joke,
then per the change calculation here,
this results in over $1 million in 40 years,
incredible, eh?
Just amazing, amazing.
So plug in other numbers if you want to,
like the cost of a pack of cigarettes, et cetera,
and you'll be amazed how changing your spending habits
can make you an absolute fortune later in life.
So please pause me, play around with this,
and then unpause me when you're ready,
and we'll move on to Example #2 of 6 together.
In Example #2, we're gonna look at how much money
we can save by not buying an expensive item.
And, since I'm Canadian,
let me change this to Canadian dollars.
That's what we call it dollars, not dollars, dollars.
Sorry, Canada.
(laughs)
You can go to Settings, or even just click on the flag here,
see the Canadian flag represents,
and let's just ignore the exchange rate for now,
as it's applicable later in the course, 'kay?
You'll see what I mean by this later on in the course
when we calculate our portfolio value,
we'll be able to convert US dollars
to whatever foreign currency we want to.
So,
in this example, I entered in Luxury Car,
but you can change the title here from Luxury Car
to something else if you wanted to.
And so in this example, if you did not buy that luxury car
with a onetime payment of $27,
then over 40 years at an average annual return of 9.5%,
we would have this much more money in savings,
it's a huge amount, huge.
So, if you want, double click on the green cell here
to see the math behind this calculation.
And so, the way to figure out what $1 today is worth
in one year
is to use the formula you see here in Excel,
which is as follows.
Your money today
times,
open brackets,
one plus the interest rate to the power of time, that's t.
Okay, so if we assume that the interest rate is 10%,
then what is $1 worth in one year?
Well, we know it's
$1.10,
but here's the math behind it.
It's $1 times one plus the interest rate,
which is 10%, to the power of one year,
which of course is $1.10.
And if we change this to two years,
then the $1 in two years at an annual interest rate
of 10% is calculated by taking a buck or a dollar
times
1.1,
which is 1%
plus 10%, so 1.1, to the power of two,
which equals $1.21.
Okay, see how compound interest earns you
that little bit extra more?
So try plugging out other items
into example two here to see what saving your money
by not spending would lead to in the future, okay?
And so,
I debated whether to include this,
so my son
wants to get those Beats by Dre
big earphones for Christmas, which is not gonna happen,
because these headphones cost literally
$349.99
US, right, for the highest end one.
It's a lotta money, right?
And I showed my son Andrew
(laughs)
that if we entered Beats by Dre here in our Example #2,
that the $349.99
earphones will be worth over a million dollars
by the time Andrew's in his 70s,
right, at an annual interest rate of 15%, right,
you can play around with the numbers for fun.
In fact,
the money
saved would be worth over $1.5 million as you can see here.
And you know,
this more than covers his retirement,
the cost to raise his kids, et cetera,
assuming inflation doesn't get outta control then.
And that money could go up by 15%
after that date as well.
And so, of course,
assume your own interest rate here as well,
your own assumptions.
And
the only Beats by Dre gift that my son is gonna get
for Christmas will be these ones here.
Lemme show you here.
Huh?
Beets
by DRE?
Funny?
No?
Sorry, I'm trying.
That's called dad humor.
When you get older like me, it's dad humor.
Anyway.
So if you want, please pause me,
and enter in your own assumptions for Exercise #2,
including the name of a product,
and watch the numbers change and how this is translated
into something we can better understand in the sentence
that is automatically created here on the right-hand side.
I had a lotta fun puttin' this together.
I tried to turn Excel math, or finance math,
into English to make it fun.
It's fun, eh?
Moving on to Example #3.
How many years does it take for your money to double?
And there's this awesome rule called the Rule of 72.
And all you hafta do is take 72
divided by the interest rate you wanna use,
and this will tell you how many years it takes
for your money to double.
And so, per Example #3 here,
we can see that it takes 7.6 years for your money to double
if you invest that money at an interest rate of 9.5%.
And so if you want to, please pause me
and play around with Example #3 here.
Moving on to Example #4.
I love this one.
How much money
do we need to save daily
at an annualized interest rate of 9.5%
in order to have exactly $1 million in 35 years?
So, let's change this one just for fun
to British pounds, 'kay?
As you can see here, you can either play around
with the numbers until you get exactly 1 million pounds,
or you can use my favorite simple Excel function,
which is called Goal Seek.
This is awesome.
Here's how you do it.
So, per this video here,
let's say I wanted to find out
how much I needed to save daily
in order to have 1 million pounds in 35 years
at an annual interest rate of 9.5%.
So here's how you do it.
You click on the Data tab in Excel,
then you select What-if Analysis,
then you select Goal Seek.
Then set the cell equal to 1 million by changing
the amount to save daily, and voila,
Excel calculates
that you need to save
9.98 pounds
daily at an annualized interest rate of 9.5%
in order to have 1 million pounds in 35 years.
And so if you want, pause me again here,
play around with this one.
This is awesome.
And please note
if you can't see
the What-if button, and if you're running an old version
of Microsoft Excel, then please go to this website here
in order to see instructions from Microsoft
on how to install what is called the free Solver Add-in.
If you have the latest version
you won't have to worry about that.
Let's move on to Example #5.
This one is similar to Example #4,
where we calculated how much to save daily,
except in Example #5, we're calculating
how much we need to save monthly
at an interest rate of 15% over 60 years
in order to have exactly $1 billion
to donate to your favorite charity,
so I changed this back to US dollars here, okay?
All right.
$1 billion for your charity.
And so, if you entered your favorite charity name
in the Settings tab, then the name of your charity
would appear right here.
For example, if you entered in my favorite charity,
which is called Doctors without Diplomas,
then it would appear here,
course I'm kidding about my favorite charity.
Okay, no more dad humor, I promise, yeah?
(laughs)
Okay, moving on.
I changed the currency again here for this one,
and actually, you know what,
let's just make it Australian dollars
instead of US dollars.
So, per this video,
we're gonna use Goal Seek
and the What-if scenario analysis option,
and we see that we would need to save $1,631.34
Australian dollars monthly.
And the earlier you get started in life,
the better, saving.
It's never too late, either.
But just please pause me if you want,
and play around with this one.
Okay, our last example, number six.
We're gonna discuss renting
versus buying a house or an apartment.
And I saved up enough money finally in my 30s
for a down payment on a house after wasting so much money
renting when I lived in New York City.
It was hard, though, because you know,
we had to pay off school loans,
and you know, Christine and I had to,
it's expensive, it's tough, it's tough.
It takes a while to be able to save up enough
to get that down payment.
The earlier you do it in life, the better,
a lot of people hafta wait until their later 30s.
So, we're gonna discuss mortgages later in the course,
but the best rule for mortgages
is to assume
that the size of your mortgage is never, ever, ever
more than two times your annual pre-tax income.
So if you make $50,000 per year,
then I don't recommend having a mortgage size
of over $100,000, and that doesn't include the down payment.
Again, we'll discuss this
in a heck of a lot more detail later in the course
when we talk about mortgages.
And the best investment you might ever make
might be your house.
So for this example,
I want you to enter in your current rent payment,
or make one up.
And I want you to find out
what the value of all those rental payments
would actually be worth in the future.
And you could see from the example here that $600 per month
in rent over 50 years at an assumed interest rate of 8%
equals $4.7 million dollars.
You know, play around with this one a lot,
as I want you to buy your place of residence when you can.
So please start saving today,
and if you're not saving today,
don't worry, because you will be
by the end of this course, I promise you,
'cause I have over 100
simple tips and strategies on how to save
and make more money.
Thanks.